1.9.1 (2024-08-26)
==================

- This release fixes the wheel builds for linux and mac and no new features or bug fixes
  are included.


1.9.0 (2024-08-22)
==================

New Features
------------

- Added an option to specify a multiprocessing or parallel processing pool when
  computing basis function coefficients for the SCF potential from discrete particles.

- Added the Burkert potential as a built-in cpotential.

- Added a method to generate the Burkert potential with just r0 as an input

- Added new particle spray method by Chen et al. (2024).

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed the parameter values in the ``FardalStreamDF`` class to be consistent with
  the values used in Fardal et al. (2015). Added an option ``gala_modified`` to the
  class to enable using the new (correct) parameter values, but the default will
  continue to use the Gala modified values (for backwards compatibility).

- Improved internal efficiency of ``DirectNBody``.

- Fixed a bug in which passing a ``DirectNBody`` instance to the ``MockStreamGenerator.
  run()`` would fail if ``save_all=False`` in the nbody instance.

- Fixed an incompatibility with Astropy v6.1 and above where ``_make_getter`` was
  removed.


API changes
-----------

- Deprecated ``gala.integrate.Integrator.run`` for
  ``gala.integrate.Integrator.__call__``. The old method will raise a warning
  and will be removed in a future release.


1.8.1 (2023-12-31)
==================

- New release to fix upload to PyPI from GitHub Actions and invalid pin in pyia
  dependency.


1.8 (2023-12-23)
================

New Features
------------

- Added a ``.guiding_center()`` method to ``PhaseSpacePosition`` and ``Orbit`` to
  compute the guiding center radius.

- Added a way to convert Gala potential instances to Agama potential instances.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug with the ``plot_contours()`` and ``plot_density_contours()`` methods so
  that times specified are now passed through correctly to the potential methods.

- Fixed the YAML output to use ``default_flow_style=None`` for serializing potential
  objects, which leads to a more efficient array output.

- ``scf.compute_coeffs_discrete`` now raises an error if GSL is not enabled rather than
  silently returning zeros

- ``SCFPotential`` will now work with IO functions (``save`` & ``load``)

- Fixes compatibility with Astropy v6.0

API changes
-----------

- Changed the way potential interoperability is done with other Galactic dynamics
  packages (Agama, galpy, etc.). It is now handled by the ``Potential.as_interop()``
  method on all potential class instances.


1.7.1 (2023-08-05)
==================

- Switched build system to use pyproject.toml instead of setup.cfg

1.7 (2023-08-05)
================

New Features
------------

- Added a method to export the internal components of an
  ``MN3ExponentialDiskPotential()`` to three ``MiyamotoNagaiPotential`` instances.

- Added a new Milky Way potential model: ``MilkyWayPotential2022``, which is based on
  updated measurements of the disk structure and circular velocity curve of the disk.

- Added the ability to use leapfrog integration within the ``DirectNBody`` integrator.

- Added a new coordinate frame for the Vasiliev+2021 Sagittarius stream coordinate
  system, ``SagittariusVasiliev21``.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug with the ``OrphanKoposov19()`` coordinate frame that caused the wrong
  rotation matrix to be returned.

- Fixed an ``AstropyDeprecationWarning`` resulting from the use of ``override__dir__``.

- Fixed a bug in ``Orbit.estimate_period()`` that would cause the method to fail with a
  ``UnitsError`` if one orbit returned a nan value for the period.

- Fixed a bug when compiling the ``dop853`` integrator.

API changes
-----------

- Refactored the way ``GreatCircleICRSFrame()`` works to be more consistent and
  unambiguous with coordinate frame definitions. The frame now requires an input pole
  and origin, but can be initialized in old ways using the ``from_*()`` class methods
  (e.g., with ``pole`` and ``ra0`` values).


1.6.1 (2022-11-07)
==================

Bug fixes
---------

- Properly incorporate commits related to ``SCFInterpolatedPotential``.


1.6 (2022-11-07)
================

New Features
------------

- Added a ``.replicate()`` method to Potential classes to enable copying
  potential objects but modifying some parameter values.

- Added a new potential class ``MN3ExponentialDiskPotential`` based on Smith et
  al. (2015): an approximation of the potential generated by a double
  exponential disk using a sum of three Miyamoto-Nagai disks.

- The ``Orbit.estimate_period()`` method now returns period estimates in all
  phase-space components instead of just the radial period.

- Added a ``store_all`` flag to the integrators to control whether to save
  phase-space information for all timesteps or only the final timestep.

- Added a ``plot_rotation_curve()`` method to all potential objects to make a 1D plot
  of the circular velocity curve.

- Added a new potential for representing multipole expansions ``MultipolePotential``.

- Added a new potential ``CylSplinePotential`` for flexible representation of
  axisymmetric potentials by allowing passing in grids of potential values
  evaluated grids of R, z values (like the ``CylSpline`` potential in Agama).

- Added a ``show_time`` flag to ``Orbit.animate()`` to control whether to show the
  current timestep.

- Changed ``Orbit.animate()`` to allow for different ``marker_style`` and
  ``segment_style`` options for individual orbits by passing a list of dicts instead
  of just a dict.

- Added an experimental new class ``SCFInterpolatedPotential`` that accepts a time
  series of coefficients and interpolates the coefficient values to any evaluation time.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug where the ``NFWPotential`` energy was nan when evaluating at the
  origin, and added tests for all potentials to check for a finite value of the
  potential at the origin (when expected).

- Fixed a bug in ``NFWPotential.from_M200_c()`` where the incorrect scale radius
  was computed (Cython does not always use Python 3 division rules for dividing
  integers!).

- Fixed a bug in the (C-level/internal) estimation of the 2nd derivative of the
  potential, used to generate mock streams, that affects non-conservative force
  fields.

API changes
-----------

- The ``Orbit.estimate_period()`` method now returns period estimates in all
  phase-space components instead of just the radial period.


1.5 (2022-03-03)
================

New Features
------------

- Implemented a basic progress bar for integrating orbits and mock streams. Pass
  ``progress=True`` with ``Integrator_kwargs`` when calling
  ``.integrate_orbit()``, or pass ``progress=True`` to
  ``MockStreamGenerator.run()``.

- Added a new symplectic integrator: The Ruth 4th-order integrator, implemented
  with the class ``Ruth4Integrator``.

- Added a ``Orbit.animate()`` method to make ``matplotlib`` animations of
  orbits.

- Modified ``Orbit._max_helper()`` to use a parabola instead of interpolation

- Added functionality to transform from action-angle coordinates to Cartesian
  position velocity coordinates in the Isochrone potential:
  ``gala.dynamics.actionangle.isochrone_aa_to_xv()``.

- Added a new method on ``DirectNBody`` to enable computing the instantaneous,
  mutual, N-body acceleration vectors ``DirectNBody.acceleration()``.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed ``find_actions()`` to accept an ``Orbit`` instance with multiple orbits.

- Fixed a bug that appeared when trying to release all mock stream particles at
  the same timestep (e.g., pericenter).

- Fixed a bug where time arrays returned from ``parse_time_specification``
  could come back with a non-float64 dtype.

- Fixed a bug with ``DirectNBody`` with composite potentials where only the
  first potential component would move as a body / particle.

- Fixed a bug with the Python implementation of Leapfrog integration
  ``LeapfrogIntegrator`` that led to incorrect orbits for non-conservative
  systems that were integrated backwards (i.e. with ``dt<<0``).

- Fixed a bug with the ``FlattenedNFW`` potential class in which the energy and
  gradient functions were not using the inputted flattening (``c`` value) and
  were instead defaulting to the spherical NFW model.

- Enabled pickling ``Frame`` instances and therefore now ``Hamiltonian``
  instances.

- Fixed a bug with ``autolim=True`` during Orbit plotting where the axes limits
  were only dependent on the most recent Orbit rather than all that were present
  on the axis

API changes
-----------

- Renamed ``gala.dynamics.actionangle.isochrone_to_aa()`` to
  ``gala.dynamics.actionangle.isochrone_xv_to_aa()``

- Renamed ``gala.dynamics.actionangle.find_actions()`` to
  ``gala.dynamics.actionangle.find_actions_o2gf()``


1.4.1 (2021-07-01)
==================

- Fixed a RST bug that caused the README to fail to render.


1.4 (2021-07-01)
================

New Features
------------

- ``UnitSystem`` objects can now be created with custom units passed in as
  Astropy ``Quantity`` objects.

- Added functionality to convert Gala potential objects to Galpy potential
  objects, or to create Gala potential objects from a pre-existing Galpy
  potential.

- Added a ``plot_3d()`` method for ``Orbit`` objects to make 3D plots of the
  orbital trajectories.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug when calling ``orbit.norbits`` when the representation is not
  cartesian.

- Fixed a bug with ``GreatCircleICRSFrame.from_endpoints()`` that caused an
  error when the input coordinates had associated velocity data.

- Fixed a bug with the ``JaffePotential`` density evaluation, which was too low
  by a factor of two.

- Implemented a density function for ``LogarithmicPotential``, which was
  missing previously.

- The analytic action-angle and ``find_actions()`` utilities now correctly
  return frequencies with angular frequency units rather than frequency.

API changes
-----------

- Removed the deprecated ``gala.coordinates.get_galactocentric2019()`` function.


1.3 (2020-10-27)
================

New Features
------------

- Added a new ``.to_sympy()`` classmethod for the ``Potential`` classes to
  return a sympy expression and variables.

- Added a method, ``.to_galpy_orbit()``, to convert Gala ``Orbit`` instances to
  Galpy ``Orbit`` objects.

- The ``NFWPotential`` can now be instantiated via a new classmethod:
  ``NFWPotential.from_M200_c()``, which accepts a virial mass and a
  concentration.

- Added a fast way of computing the Staeckel focal length, ``Delta``, using
  Gala potential classes, ``gala.dynamics.get_staeckel_fudge_delta``

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug with ``Potential`` classes ``.replace_units()`` so that classes
  with dimensionless unit systems cannot be replaced with physical unit systems,
  and vice versa.

- Implemented Hessian functions for most potentials.

- Fixed ``.to_latex()`` to properly return a latex representation of the
  potential. This uses the new ``.to_sympy()`` method under the hood.

- Potential classes now validate that input positions have dimensionality that
  matches what is expected for each potential.

API changes
-----------

- Changed the way new ``Potential`` classes are defined: they now rely on
  defining class-level ``PotentialParameter`` objects, which reduces a
  significant amount of boilerplate code in the built-in potentials.


1.2 (2020-07-13)
================

- Gala now builds on Windows!

New Features
------------

- Added a coordinate frame for the Pal 13 stream, ``Pal13Shipp20``.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug with the mock stream machinery in which the stream would not
  integrate for the specified number of timesteps if an array of
  ``n_particles`` was passed in with 0's near the end of the array.


1.1 (2020-03-08)
================

New Features
------------
- Potential objects now support replacing the unit system with the
  ``.replace_units()`` method, or by updating the ``.units`` attribute on an
  existing instance.
- Added a ``DirectNBody`` class that supports direct N-body orbit integration in
  (optional) external background potentials.
- Added a coordinate frame for the Jhelum stream, ``JhelumBonaca19``.
- Added a function for retrieving a more modern Galactocentric reference frame,
  ``gala.coordinates.get_galactocentric2019()``.
- Added a classmethod to allow initializing a ``GreatCircleICRSFrame`` from a
  rotation matrix that specifies the transformation from ``ICRS`` to the great
  circle frame.

Bug fixes
---------
- Fixed an issue that led to incorrect ``GreatCircleICRSFrame`` transformations
  when no ``ra0`` was provided.
- Fixed a bug in the ``OrphanKoposov19`` transformation.

API changes
-----------
- Overhauled the mock stellar stream generation methodology to allow for more
  general stream generation. See ``MockStreamGenerator`` and the stream
  distribution function classes, e.g., ``FardalStreamDF``.
- Removed deprecated ``CartesianPhaseSpacePosition`` class.
- Removed long deprecated ``Quaternion`` class.


1.0 (2019-04-12)
================

New Features
------------
- Added a new coordinate frame for great circle coordinate systems defined by a
  pole. This frame can be created with a pole and origin, a pole and longitude
  zero point, by two points along a great circle, or by specifying the cartesian
  basis vectors of the new frame.
- Added a function to transform a proper motion covariance matrix to a new
  coordinate frame.
- Added support for compiling Gala with or without the GNU Scientific Library
  (GSL), which is needed for the new potential classes indicated below.
- Added a new ``PowerLawCutoffPotential`` class for a power-law density
  distribution with an exponential cutoff *(requires GSL)*.
- Added an implementation of the ``MWPotential2014`` from ``galpy`` (called
  ``BovyMWPotential2014`` in ``gala``) *(requires GSL)*.
- Added an implementation of the Self-Consistent Field (SCF) basis function
  expansion method for representing potential-density pairs *(requires GSL)*.
- Most Potential classes now support rotations and origin shifts through the
  ``R`` and ``origin`` arguments.
- Added a ``progress`` argument to the Python integrators to display a progress
  bar when stepping the integrators.
- When generating mock stellar streams and storing snapshots (rather than just
  the final phase-space positions of the particles) now supports specifying the
  snapshot frequency with the ``output_every`` argument.

Bug fixes
---------
- Stream frames now properly wrap the longitude (``phi1``) components to the
  range (-180, 180) deg.

API changes
-----------
- Stream classes have been renamed to reflect the author that defined them.
- Proper motion and coordinate velocity transformations have now been removed in
  favor of the implementations in Astropy.
- Added a ``.data`` attribute to ``PhaseSpacePosition`` objects that returns a
  ``Representation`` or ``NDRepresentation`` instance with velocity data
  (differentials) attached.

0.3 (2018-04-23)
================

New Features
------------

- Added a ``NullPotential`` class that has 0 mass and serves as a placeholder.
- Added a new ``zmax()`` method on the ``Orbit`` class to compute the maximum z
  heights and times, or the mean maximum z height. Similar to ``apocenter()``
  and ``pericenter()``.
- Added a new generator method on the ``Orbit`` class for easy iteration over
  orbits.

Bug fixes
---------

- ``Orbit.norbits`` now works...oops.
- ``apocenter()`` and ``pericenter()`` now work when more than one orbit is
  stored in an ``Orbit`` class.

0.2.2 (2017-10-07)
==================

New features
------------
- Added a new coordinate frame aligned with the Palomar 5 stream.
- Added a function ``gala.dynamics.combine`` to combine ``PhaseSpacePosition``
  or ``Orbit`` objects.

Bug fixes
---------
- Added a density function for the Kepler potential.
- Added a density function for the Long & Murali bar potential

Other changes
-------------
- Added JOSS paper.
- Cleaned up some tests and documentation to use the ``Hamiltonian`` object.

0.2.1 (2017-07-19)
==================

Bug fixes
---------
- Array parameters are now numpy.ravel'd before being passed to the
  ``CPotentialWrapper`` class methods.
- Added attribution to Bovy 2015 for disk potential in MilkyWayPotential

0.2 (2017-07-15)
================

New Features
------------
- Added a new potential class for the Satoh density (Satoh 1980).
- Added support for Leapfrog integration when generating mock stellar streams.
- Added new colormaps and defaults for the matplotlib style.
- Added support for non-inertial reference frames and implemented a constant
  rotating reference frame.
- Added a new class - ``Hamiltonian`` - for storing potentials with reference
  frames. This should be used for easy orbit integration instead of the
  potential classes.
- Added a new argument to the mock stream generation functions t output orbits
  of all of the mock stream star particles to an HDF5 file.
- Cleaned up and simplified the process of subclassing a C-implemented
  gravitational potential.
- Gravitational potential class instances can now be composed by just adding the
  instances.
- Added a ``MilkyWayPotential`` class.

API-breaking changes
--------------------
- ``CartesianPhaseSpacePosition`` and ``CartesianOrbit`` are deprecated. Use
  ``PhaseSpacePosition`` and ``Orbit`` with a Cartesian representation instead.
- Overhauled the storage of position and velocity information on
  ``PhaseSpacePosition`` and ``Orbit`` classes. This uses new features in
  Astropy 2.0 that allow attaching "differential" classes to representation
  classes for storing velocity information. ``.pos`` and ``.vel`` no longer
  point to arrays of Cartesian coordinates, but now instead point to
  astropy.coordinates representation and differential objects, respectively.

0.1.1 (2016-05-20)
==================

- Removed debug statement.
- Added 'Why' page to documentation.

0.1.0 (2016-05-19)
==================

- Initial release.
