.. _gala-nbody:

******************************
N-body (`gala.dynamics.nbody`)
******************************

Introduction
============

With the `~gala.potential.hamiltonian.Hamiltonian` and potential classes
(:ref:`potential`), Gala contains functionality for integrating test particle
orbits in background gravitational fields. To supplement this, Gala also now
contains some limited functionality for performing N-body orbit integrations
through direct N-body force calculations between particles. With the
`gala.dynamics.nbody` subpackage, gravitational fields (i.e., any potential
class from :mod:`gala.potential`) can be sourced by particles that interact, and
optionally feel a background/external potential. To use this functionality, the
core class is `~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody`. Below, we'll go through a few
examples of using this class to perform orbit integrations

For the examples below the following imports have already been executed::

    >>> import astropy.units as u
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import gala.potential as gp
    >>> import gala.dynamics as gd
    >>> from gala.dynamics.nbody import DirectNBody
    >>> from gala.units import galactic, UnitSystem


Getting started
===============

The `~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody`, at minimum, must be instantiated with a
set of particle orbital initial conditions along with a specification of the
gravitational fields sourced by each particle --- that is, the number of initial
conditions must match the input list of gravitational potential objects that
specify the particle mass distributions. Other optional arguments to
`~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody` allow you to set the unit system (i.e., to
improve numerical precision when time-stepping the orbit integration), or to
specify a background gravitational potential. Let's now go through a few
examples of using this class in practice.


Example: Mixed test particle and massive particle orbit integration
===================================================================

Like with `~gala.potential.hamiltonian.Hamiltonian` orbit integration, orbital
initial conditions are passed in to `~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody` by
passing in a single `~gala.dynamics.PhaseSpacePosition` object. Let's create two
initial conditions by specifying the position and velocity of two particles,
then combine them into a single `~gala.dynamics.PhaseSpacePosition` object::

    >>> w0_1 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[0, 0, 0] * u.pc,
    ...                              vel=[0, 1.5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    >>> w0_2 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=w0_1.xyz + [100., 0, 0] * u.pc,
    ...                              vel=w0_1.v_xyz + [0, 5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    >>> w0 = gd.combine((w0_1, w0_2))
    >>> w0.shape
    (2,)

We'll then treat particle 1 as a massive object by sourcing a
`~gala.potential.potential.HernquistPotential` at the location of the particle,
and particle 2 as a test particle: To treat some particles as test particles,
you can pass ``None`` or a `~gala.potential.potential.NullPotential` instance
for the corresponding particle potential::

    >>> pot1 = gp.HernquistPotential(m=1e7*u.Msun, c=0.5*u.kpc, units=galactic)
    >>> particle_pot = [pot1, None]

Let's now create an N-body instance and try integrating the orbits of the two
particles. Here, there is no external potential, so particle 1 (the massive
particle) will move off in a straight line. We've created the initial conditions
for particle 2 so that it will remain bound to the potential sourced by particle
1, and so will orbit it as it moves. Let's create the object and integrate the
orbits::

    >>> nbody = DirectNBody(w0, particle_pot)
    >>> orbits = nbody.integrate_orbit(dt=1e-2*u.Myr, t1=0, t2=1*u.Gyr)
    >>> fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5)) # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> _ = orbits[:, 0].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> _ = orbits[:, 1].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs
    :width: 60%

    import astropy.units as u
    import numpy as np
    import gala.potential as gp
    import gala.dynamics as gd
    from gala.dynamics.nbody import DirectNBody
    from gala.units import galactic, UnitSystem
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    w0_1 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[0, 0, 0] * u.pc,
                                 vel=[0, 1.5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    w0_2 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=w0_1.xyz + [100., 0, 0] * u.pc,
                                 vel=w0_1.v_xyz + [0, 5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    w0 = gd.combine((w0_1, w0_2))

    pot1 = gp.HernquistPotential(m=1e7*u.Msun, c=0.5*u.kpc, units=galactic)
    particle_pot = [pot1, None]

    nbody = DirectNBody(w0, particle_pot)
    orbits = nbody.integrate_orbit(dt=1e-2*u.Myr, t1=0, t2=1*u.Gyr)
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5))
    _ = orbits[:, 0].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax])
    _ = orbits[:, 1].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax])
    fig.tight_layout()

Example: N-body integration with a background potential
=======================================================

With `~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody`, we can also specify a background or
external potential to integrate all orbits in. To do this, you can optionally
pass in an external potential as a potential object to
`~gala.dynamics.nbody.DirectNBody`. Here, as an example, we'll repeat a similar
integration as above, but (1) add a positional offset of the initial conditions
from the origin, and (2) specify an external potential using the
`~gala.potential.potential.MilkyWayPotential` class as an external potential::

    >>> external_pot = gp.MilkyWayPotential(version="latest")
    >>> w0_1 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[10, 0, 0] * u.kpc,
    ...                              vel=[0, 200, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    >>> w0_2 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=w0_1.xyz + [10., 0, 0] * u.pc,
    ...                              vel=w0_1.v_xyz + [0, 5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    >>> w0 = gd.combine((w0_1, w0_2))
    >>> pot1 = gp.HernquistPotential(m=1e7*u.Msun, c=0.5*u.kpc, units=galactic)
    >>> particle_pot = [pot1, None]
    >>> nbody = DirectNBody(w0, particle_pot, external_potential=external_pot)
    >>> orbits = nbody.integrate_orbit(dt=1e-2*u.Myr, t1=0, t2=1*u.Gyr)
    >>> fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5)) # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> _ = orbits[:, 0].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> _ = orbits[:, 1].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs
    :width: 60%

    external_pot = gp.MilkyWayPotential(version="latest")
    w0_1 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[10, 0, 0] * u.kpc,
                                 vel=[0, 200, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    w0_2 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=w0_1.xyz + [10., 0, 0] * u.pc,
                                 vel=w0_1.v_xyz + [0, 5, 0] * u.km/u.s)
    w0 = gd.combine((w0_1, w0_2))
    pot1 = gp.HernquistPotential(m=1e7*u.Msun, c=0.5*u.kpc, units=galactic)
    particle_pot = [pot1, None]
    nbody = DirectNBody(w0, particle_pot, external_potential=external_pot)
    orbits = nbody.integrate_orbit(dt=1e-2*u.Myr, t1=0, t2=1*u.Gyr)

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5)) # doctest: +SKIP
    _ = orbits[:, 0].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP
    _ = orbits[:, 1].plot(['x', 'y'], axes=[ax]) # doctest: +SKIP

In this case, the orbits are so similar that it is hard to tell whether the test
particle is actually bound to the secondary mass. Let's instead now plot the
position in the x-y plane of particle 2 relative to particle 1. This will look
strange because we have not transformed to the frame of particle 1, but it
should give us a sense of whether particle 2 is bound or unbound to this mass::

    >>> dxyz = orbits[:, 0].xyz - orbits[:, 1].xyz
    >>> fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5)) # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> ax.plot(dxyz[0], dxyz[1]) # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs
    :width: 60%

    dxyz = orbits[:, 0].xyz - orbits[:, 1].xyz

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(5, 5)) # doctest: +SKIP
    ax.plot(dxyz[0], dxyz[1]) # doctest: +SKIP
    ax.set_xlim(-0.1, 0.1)
    ax.set_ylim(-0.1, 0.1)

From this, it looks like particle 2 is indeed still bound to particle 1 as they
both orbit within the external potential.


.. automodapi:: gala.dynamics.nbody
